In this assignment, you will implement six system calls related to semaphores and condition variables.
You will also implement a demand-paged virtual memory and a few page replacement algorithms. You will test 
your implementations by writing a few test programs.

Download cs330assignment3.zip and unzip it in your home directory. This will create a new directory
named cs330assignment3/ and place my version of NachOS under it.

You should compile and run NachOS only from the nachos/code/userprog/ directory. You should run NachOS as
follows.

> ./nachos -rs s -A n -P p -x ../test/executablename

The -rs option makes the timer yields happen at random points in time. Here s is a randomization 
seed (an integer). If you use different seeds in different runs, the preemption points will be different.
Use zero as the seed value (i.e., -rs 0) for reporting all your results. This is important because
changing the seed value may change the results slightly leading to potential confusion in grading. However,
feel free to experiment with other seed values, but do not report these results. Your implementation 
should run without any error for arbitrary seed values. Here n is an integer from the set {1, 2, 3, 4} 
and p is an integer between 0 and 100 (both ends inclusive). The value of n determines the chosen 
scheduling algorithm and the value of p determines the base priority of the thread. The four scheduling 
algorithms are defined in nachos/code/threads/system.h. The quantum used by algorithms 3 and 4 are 
defined as SCHED_QUANTUM in nachos/code/threads/system.h. You will use algorithm 3 (round robin) for 
most parts of this assignment, unless specified otherwise. Set both SCHED_QUANTUM and TimerTicks to 100. 
The -P flag is optional unless n is chosen to be 4. You should specify 3 for n, unless you are asked to do otherwise.

In the following, I will discuss the steps involved in this assignment.

1. Implementing shared memory
------------------------------

For testing synchronization primitives, it is necessary to allow the threads to share memory because
the synchronization primitives protect shared memory variables. To implement shared memory, I have
introduced a new system call in nachos/code/userprog/syscall.h. This system call is syscall_ShmAllocate.
The corresponding function that the user programs can use is also declared: sys_ShmAllocate(). This function
takes the size of the shared memory to allocate in bytes and returns the starting virtual address of
the shared memory region. You need to use it in the following way in your test programs. Make sure to
allocate all shared memory before invoking any sys_Fork(). Suppose you have two integers that you want to
share across the parent and the child.

int main () {
...
int *array = (int*)sys_ShmAllocate(2*sizeof(int));

/* Now you can use array[0] and array[1] as the two shared variables. */

}

You can make multiple calls to sys_ShmAllocate to allocate different types of shared memory regions e.g.,
int, unsigned, char, etc.. Your task is to implement the syscall_ShmAllocate system call in
nachos/code/userprog/exception.cc. This system call should do the following.

It should allocate a new page table for the caller with number of entries equal to the number of 
current entries plus the number of pages needed to cover the requested shared memory region size. 
It will copy the existing page table entries from the old page table into the new one. It will 
also allocate physical pages for the shared memory region and set up the virtual to physical maps 
for these pages in the remaining entries of the new page table. You have to introduce a shared 
field in the TranslationEntry class defined in nachos/code/machine/translate.h to remember which 
pages are shared. On a sys_Fork() call, the virtual to physical maps of the shared pages are just 
copied from the parent to child's page table and no new physical pages would be allocated for these 
pages; otherwise sys_Fork() works as already implemented. The syscall_ShmAllocate system call 
returns the starting virtual address of the first shared page within the range of allocated shared 
pages. Remember to free the old page table of the caller and set the pageTable and pageTableSize fields 
in the Machine class correctly.

2. Implementing semaphores
---------------------------

NachOS already has a complete implementation of counting semaphores. See nachos/code/threads/synch.h and
nachos/code/threads/synch.cc. For allowing user access to the semaphores from the test programs,
you need to implement three new system calls so that the user programs can make use of
the semaphores. These new system calls are defined in nachos/code/userprog/syscall.h and they are 
called syscall_SemGet, syscall_SemOp, and syscall_SemCtl. The corresponding user calls are 
sys_SemGet(), sys_SemOp(), and sys_SemCtl(). These functions are also declared in 
nachos/code/userprog/syscall.h. The sys_SemGet() function takes a semaphore key and returns a 
semaphore id. If no semaphore exists with the passed key, a new semaphore is allocated and its id 
is returned. Internally, you should maintain a mapping between semaphore keys and semaphore ids. 
Each semaphore id corresponds to a unique semaphore. Assume some maximum allowable number of 
semaphores. The sys_SemOp() function takes a semaphore id and an integer signifying the adjustment 
to be applied to the semaphore value. For example, a traditional wait() function would pass -1 for 
the second parameter, while the signal function would pass 1 for the second parameter. For this 
assignment, it is enough to support just two values for the second parameter: 1 and -1. The 
sys_SemCtl() function takes three arguments. The first one is the semaphore id, the second one 
is the command (can be one of three: SYNCH_REMOVE, SYNCH_GET, and SYNCH_SET), and the third 
argument is an integer pointer used to return the semaphore value if the command is SYNCH_GET. 
The function returns 0 if the system call completes properly; otherwise it returns -1. The three 
commands are defined in nachos/code/threads/synchop.h. You should include synchop.h in 
all test programs that use the sys_SemCtl() function. The SYNCH_REMOVE command deletes the semaphore 
and frees the semaphore table entry. In this case, the third argument can be NULL. The SYNCH_GET 
command returns the value of the semaphore in the third argument. The SYNCH_SET command sets the 
value of the semaphore to the value of the integer whose address is passed as the third argument. 
The Semaphore class of NachOS does not have any interface method for querying or setting the value 
of a semaphore. You will have to incorporate these two methods in the Semaphore class.

Your task is to implement the three system calls in nachos/code/userprog/exception.cc, write test 
programs that exercise semaphores (remember to modify the Makefile in the nachos/code/test/ directory 
appropriately), and verify that your implementations are correct. You can use the synchronization problems 
discussed and demonstrated in the class as your test cases.

3. Implementing condition variables
------------------------------------

NachOS has defined a Condition class in nachos/code/threads/synch.h, but does not implement the interface
methods. Your task is to first complete this implementation. Your implementation should use the signal and
continue protocol in the Signal and Broadcast methods. Condition variables are objects of type Condition.
The current declarations of Wait, Signal, and Broadcast methods in the Condition class take a Lock pointer.
Declare a new set of overloaded methods Wait, Signal, and Broadcast that you will implement. The Wait method
should take a Semaphore pointer so that you can use the Semaphore implementation for protecting
the condition variables and other related shared variables. The Signal and Broadcast methods need not have
any argument. Please remember to retain the existing declarations of Wait, Signal, and Broadcast methods, but
you need not implement these. This is to make sure that NachOS continues to compile cleanly.

I have defined three new system calls in nachos/code/userprog/syscall.h related to condition variables. 
These are syscall_CondGet, syscall_CondOp, and syscall_CondRemove. The corresponding user functions are 
also declared: sys_CondGet(), sys_CondOp(), and sys_CondRemove(). The sys_CondGet() function takes a key 
and returns a condition variable id. If no condition variable exists with the passed key, a new condition 
variable is allocated and its id is returned. Internally, you should maintain a mapping between condition 
variable keys and condition variable ids. Each condition variable id corresponds to a unique condition 
variable. The sys_CondOp() function takes a condition variable id, an integer specifying the operation to 
be applied on the condition variable, and the id of the semaphore protecting the condition variable. The 
operations that can be passed as the second argument are defined in nachos/code/threads/synchop.h. These 
are COND_OP_WAIT, COND_OP_SIGNAL, and COND_OP_BROADCAST. You should include synchop.h in all test programs 
that use the sys_CondOp() function. The sys_CondRemove() function takes a condition variable id and deletes 
the condition variable freeing the condition variable id. The function returns zero on successful deletion; 
otherwise it returns -1. You need to implement these three system calls in nachos/code/userprog/exception.cc, 
write test programs that exercise condition variables (remember to modify the Makefile in the nachos/code/test/ 
directory appropriately), and verify that your implementations are correct. You can use the synchronization 
problems discussed and demonstrated in the class as your test cases. I have already provided one test program queue.c in the 
nachos/code/test/ directory. This program implements the FIFO queue using semaphores and condition variables 
as discussed in the class. Please read the comments in queue.c to understand what it does.

4. Implementing demand-paged virtual memory
--------------------------------------------

The current implementation of NachOS allocates the complete address space of a thread when the 
thread is created. This is not how realistic systems work. The entire executable may not be 
needed by the thread at the same time. You will change the implementation such that as and when 
the first access to a virtual page comes, we allocate the next available physical page, and register 
this mapping in the page table entry corresponding to the virtual page. When a new test program is 
started, the number of virtual pages is calculated from the executable file, as usual. Accordingly, 
the page table is allocated and all entries are initialized as invalid (i.e., valid is FALSE). At 
this point no physical page is allocated. When a virtual page is accessed for the first time, the 
next available physical page is assigned to the virtual page, the page table entry is changed to 
valid state, and the virtual to physical page mapping is registered in the entry. At this time, the 
page is zeroed out and the contents of the page from the executable file are copied into the correct 
locations of the memory array. When a thread is forked, you should, as usual, create a number of page 
table entries equal to the number of page table entries of the parent and copy the contents of the valid 
physical pages of the parent into child's physical pages. Beyond this point the parent and child will 
allocate their pages on demand independently as and when accesses come. Also, change the implementation 
of syscall_Exec appropriately. In other words, syscall_Exec will not allocate any physical page frame, 
which will be allocated on demand as the new executable makes memory accesses. It should free the page 
table of the caller and allocate a new one depending on the size of the new executable. It should 
free all the physical pages belonging to the caller, except the shared ones. These pages are now available 
for allocation to other threads. All memory accesses go through the Translate method of the Machine class. 
This is where the page table is looked up to find the virtual to physical page mapping. When a virtual page 
is found in an invalid state in the page table, it should be counted as a page fault, and the page fault 
is handled by allocating the next free physical page and registering this mapping in the page table entry. 
Your task is to detect page faults, count them, and handle them on demand. Your simulation should report 
the number of page faults at the end. Assume a page fault latency of 1000 ticks. During this time the 
thread undergoing the page fault must remain in BLOCKED state. Make use of the sleep queue developed in 
the first assignment for this purpose. When the process is scheduled again, it should start execution 
from the instruction that suffered from a page fault. In summary, the page fault needs to be modeled as a 
restartable exception. Remember to model the page faults correctly in a sys_Fork() call i.e., the 
caller may transition in and out of the BLOCKED state multiple times depending on the number of 
pages to be copied. We are not modeling copy-on-write.

One way to incorporate demand paging in the implementation of syscall_Fork is to run a loop over 
the parent's page table. Each iteration i of the loop examines the entry i of parent's page table 
and if it is valid, it allocates a physical page frame for the child. Suppose the virtual page i 
of parent is mapped to physical page frame p. While allocating the child's page frame, it may be 
necessary to replace a page if all page frames are occupied. You should invoke your page 
replacement algorithm and can replace any page selected by the algorithm except the page p. The 
reason why you cannot replace the page p of the parent should be obvious (you need to copy the
contents of page p into the newly allocated child's page frame, so you want this page to be resident 
in memory). Suppose the page frame allocated to the child is c. Once the contents of page frame p 
are copied into page frame c, you should correctly update the replacement states of these two pages. 
In other words, if the replacement policy is LRU, the page frame c should be the MRU frame and page 
frame p should be the next MRU frame (copying involves reading from p first and then writing to c 
making c the MRU frame and p the next MRU frame). If the replacement policy is LRU-CLOCK, the
reference bits of both p and c should be set to 1 (or TRUE).

To simplify matters, we will assume that shared pages are not allocated on demand. Instead, the 
syscall_ShmAllocate call allocates all the necessary shared physical pages. These should be counted 
as page faults, but no latency should be charged i.e., the caller will just continue executing. This 
is because there is usually nothing to be copied from the disk at the time of allocating a shared 
physical page.

Handling page faults inside system calls involves one additional step. These page faults arise when a 
system call handler invokes ReadMem or WriteMem on a virtual address which is not yet present in the 
physical memory. In the case of a page fault, the ReadMem and WriteMem methods return FALSE. Depending 
on the return value of these methods, you may have to keep retrying the ReadMem or WriteMem until you 
get a return value of TRUE.

A situation may arise where all the physical pages are currently occupied and a thread undergoes a 
page fault. This can happen if NumPhysPages is less than the requirement of all the threads. In 
this case, you have to select one physical page for replacement, whose contents will now be overwritten 
by the new page. You will implement four replacement policies, namely, Random, FIFO, LRU, and LRU-CLOCK, 
and evaluate the number of page faults returned by each. Also, at the time of replacing a page, you need 
to do the following things. To simplify matters, we will ensure that shared pages are never considered 
for replacement.

Find out the corresponding page table entry and change its state to invalid. If the page table 
entry is in dirty state (happens if the page is modified by the running program), you have to back 
up the contents of the replaced page so that when the page is needed later, it can be loaded back 
correctly. For this purpose, you will allocate a character array (just like the memory array) per 
thread when a thread is created. The length of the array should be equal to the number of virtual 
pages in the executable multiplied by the page size. When a page is replaced, its contents are 
stored in the corresponding locations of this array. Now, at the time of a page fault, you need to 
know if the contents of the page should be loaded from the executable file or the backup array. 
Introduce a new field in the page table entry for this purpose. Initialize this at the time of 
thread creation to mention that the page should be loaded from the executable file. When a 
page is replaced, change the field to mention that it should be loaded from the backup array on 
the next fault for this page. Finding the page table entry corresponding to a replaced page may 
be tedious. Think of data structures that can accelerate this.

Notice that our demand-paged virtual memory model is a highly simplified version of the reality. 
We do not model a disk or a swap space. The backup array serves the purpose of the next level storage.

HINT: First, run with a large physical memory i.e., set NumPhysPages to a large value so 
that a page replacement would never be needed and ensure that demand paging works correctly. 
Next, reduce NumPhysPages and test your page replacement algorithms. Make sure to test your 
demand-paged virtual memory system on programs involving sys_Fork(), sys_Exec(), and shared memory.

For the test programs that do not use sys_Fork() or shared memory, your
implementation should run correctly with just two pages (one page to keep
the current instruction and another page for data). However, your
patience will be tested here because these simulations may take a long time.
For example, the vectorsum program on my implementation takes about three
minutes with two frames and random replacement. The programs that use sys_Fork()
and create multiple threads will require at least two pages per thread.
The programs that use share memory will require additional number of pages
to accommodate the shared pages, which can never be replaced as per our design.

Introduce a new command line flag -R followed by an integer from {1, 2, 3, 4} for specifying 
the page replacement algorithm according to the following list.

1. Random
2. FIFO
3. LRU
4. LRU-CLOCK

If this flag is not specified, the simulator should fall back to the demand-paged 
virtual memory system with large enough physical memory so that page replacement need
not be invoked. This flag should be used as follows, where r belongs to the set {1, 2, 3, 4}.

> ./nachos -rs s -A n -P p -R r -x ../test/executablename

WHAT TO SUBMIT
---------------

Report the number of page faults and the total number of ticks needed to complete 
the execution for each of the following three programs provided in the nachos/code/test/
directory: vmtest1, vmtest2, queue using each of the four page replacement policies.
For vmtest1 and vmtest2, report the statistics for the following six values of 
NumPhysPages: 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512. For queue, report the statistics for the
following four values of NumPhysPages: 16, 32, 64, 128. Prepare one table for each of the
three applications. Remember that these results should be collected with randomization 
seed zero (i.e., -rs 0) and round-robin scheduling (i.e., -A 3) with both SCHED_QUANTUM 
and TimerTicks set to 100. Explain these results. Put these tables and explanations 
along with any other comments related to the other parts of the assignment in a pdf 
document. Name the pdf file groupX.pdf (replace X by your assigned group id).

Note: One simulation of vmtest1 with NumPhysPages set to sixteen and random
replacement policy will take around fifteen minutes. With more frames and a
better policy, simulation time will go down. Please be prepared for this and
start your test runs early.

Execute make clean in the threads and userprog directories. Prepare the 
submission zip ball of your machine/, threads/, and userprog/ directories. 
Your submission at the end of simulation must print the number of page faults.
You are welcome to provide more statistics.

> cd nachos/code/
> zip -r groupX.zip machine/ threads/ userprog/

Replace X by your assigned group id. Send an email to
cs330autumn2014@gmail.com with subject "[CS330] Assignment3" and attach
groupX.zip and groupX.pdf to the mail. The body of the mail should contain the following
two sentences.

1. I have not copied any part of this submission from any other group.
2. I have not helped any other group copy any part of this submission.

All the members of the group should put their names and roll numbers below the
statement.

PUNISHMENT FOR CHEATING
------------------------

Members of any group found cheating or helping others cheat will be assigned an F grade in
the course.
